# Project1
# The Impact of COVID-19 on Air Travel #
*Alex Schultz | Paul Preetam | Jen Mattingly*


**Research Introduction**:  
For Project 1, our group focused on the airline industry in the United States during the coronavirus pandemic in 2020. The main topics of the study include aggregate passenger trends, revenue loss, and major airport flight cancellations to understand the impact of the pandemic. The data used in the research was collected from the Bureau of Transportation and Transportation Security Administration. The scope of our data is from the beginning of 2019 until the end of 2020. One dataset did not include December 2020 data, we omitted this month for one of our visualizations.

**Explanation, Exploration, & Cleanup**:  
The most difficult aspect of the project was finding the correct data needed, for many datasets did not include 2020 data, and most did not include 2021 data. Our passenger data included 2021 data which was fortunate. We used aggregate passenger data and the *concat* command to combined the data into a single column in order to create line and bar graphs to show the intense decline in passengers beginning in 2020 March. For a more detailed graph, we use a module called *BeautifulSoup* to create a visual that compares daily TSA data from 2020 and 2021 in order to understand how the airline industry is still suffering from the impacts.

Monthly revenue data was found on the Bureau of Transporation's website. In order to use this data how we wanted, we had to combine the 2019 and 2020 datasets using the *pd.merge* command to move all our data into one dataframe. Subtracting 2020 revenue from 2019 revenue using column referencing showed us potential losses that were incurred in 2020. Finally, we create a line graph that depicts revenue loss of both 2020 and 2019 on the same graph.

The last visualization we create is a heatmap that depicts the degree of flight cancellations in the five busiest airports in the United States. The airports are conveniently spaced out into different geographic regions which helps paint a more accurate picture of the country. The heatmap is created using a Google API key. We had to create a dataset that generated flight cancellation as a percentage of total flights, which we then uploaded to Jupyter to analyze. Using *gmaps*, *heat_layer*, and coordiantes of the airports we are able to create a visualization depicting the airports hit most by the pandemic.

**Results & Analysis**:  
Our results were as expected, all metrics we studied in the industry took a steep decline. In April 2019, there were roughly 70 million domestic travelers in the US while in April 2020 that number dwindled all the way to below 10 million. These numbers recovered slightly to 20m-30m throughout the summer and into the fall months. Total % change in domestic revenue in 2019 was a positive 4.30%, which then saw a nosedive in 2020 at -59.42% compared to the previous year. Our daily TSA data can explain the decline in revenue. TSA checked roughly 2m passengers daily on average in 2019. This number has declined to under 500,000 passengers in many days of 2021. We concluded the airline industry is still recovering tremendously from the impact of the coronavirus due to these still extremely low numbers of passengers. Lastly, the flight cancellation heatmap gave some great insight on which airports acted quickly and which airports were still operating as normal. JFK in New York had 47% of flights cancelled from March 15th to April 30th, the scope of this specific portion of the study. American Airlines flights were used for this study, they have the largest fleet in the United States. JFK was the largest cancellation percentage of the 5 major airports and made sense due to the initial impact the virus had on New York before any other major city. DFW in Dallas is the next largest contributor settling at 39% cancellations, which also made sense given this airport still had 14,189 flights scheduled, almost tripling the amount of the next airport on this list (ORD had 5,092 scheduled flights).

**Conclusion**:  
In conclusion, the airline industry was hit extremely hard during the pandemic, and it still has not recovered. While vaccine hope has caused a slight increase in passengers in 2021 compared to 2020, the revenue loss is drastic and the industry may not be fully healed for many years to come. When the airlines will be back towards early 2020 levels is uncertain and is extremely dependent on the rate of daily new cases, effectiveness of the vaccines, and how quickly our country can disperse them. 
